Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
17
German balance of payments in 2020 
In 2020, during the coronavirus pandemic, the German economy’s current account surplus  decreased by ½ percentage point to 7% of nominal gross domestic product (GDP). As a result of  the global shock caused by the pandemic, the current account surplus collapsed to less than 5%  of GDP in the second quarter, but quickly rebounded in the second half of the year. During the  year under review, the pandemic was reflected in lower surpluses in goods trade and primary  income, while the balance of the services account, which traditionally runs a deficit, moved mar 
ginally into positive territory. The broadly based slump in foreign demand as well as composition  effects had a considerable negative impact on Germany’s exports, whilst imports fell to a lesser  extent. The deep recession in the global economy depressed import prices, especially for crude  oil, which dampened the decline in the balance of foreign trade. The surplus on primary income  declined substantially as a result of lower earnings from German direct investment, in particular.  The services account was affected especially by the lower deficit in travel. Aggregate net lending/ net borrowing relative to GDP fell due to the sharp decrease in aggregate savings, which exceeded  the cyclically-induced decline in investment. The fall in saving was triggered by the government  budget’s turnaround into a deficit, which was primarily a reflection of the comprehensive govern 
ment assistance measures. By contrast, there was a surge in household saving. 
The saving and investment behaviour of an economy is also reflected in its capital flows. In terms  of cross-border investment and funding decisions, the increasing diversification of investments,  the continuing globalisation within the corporate sector, and the changing political risks and  monetary policy measures in particular played key roles in this context. This also holds true for  German capital flows. Furthermore, the coronavirus pandemic and its evolution were of great sig 
nificance in 2020. In addition, the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union  (Brexit) left its mark on Germany’s capital flows. Financial corporations relocated certain financial  services that had previously been conducted in the United Kingdom to group entities in Germany,  which primarily impacted the gross figures for individual items in the balance of payments. 
Overall, Germany’s net capital exports totalled €227½ billion and were thus higher than in the  preceding year (€204 billion). Securities transactions as well as other investment and financial  derivatives recorded outflows of funds on balance. With regard to other investment, Germany’s  TARGET2 claims vis-à-vis the European Central Bank (ECB) rose considerably over the course of the  year. Direct investment saw marginal net capital imports for the first time since 2003. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
18
Current account 
Underlying trends in the  
current account 
GDP in the second quarter. In the second half  of the year, it quickly rebounded and stood at  more than 8% of GDP in the fourth quarter. 
The sub-accounts of the current account bal 
Smaller sur 
Current account  surplus down  significantly 
In 2020, Germany’s current account surplus  went down by €26½ billion to €232 billion.1 In  relation to nominal GDP, this corresponded to a  decline of ½  percentage point to 7%.2 The  coronavirus pandemic and the measures taken  to contain it triggered unusual fluctuations in  Germany’s current account over the course of  the year. Due to the global shock caused by the  pandemic, the current account surplus col lapsed from more than 7% to less than 5% of  
Germany's current account 
As a percentage of GDP 
Current account balance 
Components: 
ance were, in some cases, pushed in opposing  directions by the coronavirus pandemic. The  surplus in goods trade declined considerably in  the reporting year. This was chiefly attributable  to the lower surplus in foreign trade. By con 
trast, receipts and expenditure in the services  account, which traditionally runs a deficit, were  almost balanced; this supported the surplus.  The lower deficit in foreign travel was decisive  here and reflected the restrictions to cross 
border travel resulting from the pandemic. The  surplus in primary income recorded a consider able decrease mainly due to lower earnings  from German foreign direct investment against  the backdrop of pandemic-related recessions in  most of the countries of domicile. The deficit in  
pluses in goods  trade and pri mary income;  services account  supports surplus 
+ 
12 
Trade in goods1 Services excluding travel
Primary income Secondary income 
the secondary income balance rose slightly. 
+ + + + + 
– – – 
Travel
	

	Overall
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	of which
	

	With the euro area countries(enlarged scale)
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
2 
4 
6 
These tendencies largely continued until the  end of the year. Consequently, the one-off de velopments in the sub-accounts did not fully  normalise, even though the total fourth-quarter  balance slightly exceeded the prior-year figure. 
In 2020, German enterprises were faced with a  global economic recession on a remarkable  scale. According to figures from the World  
Trade Monitor published by the Centraal Plan + 6 
bureau, the volume of global trade dropped  + 5 
almost as sharply as it had during the collapse  + 4 
+ 3 
1 Owing to the measures taken to contain the coronavirus  + 2 
pandemic, public life has at times been subject to consider able restrictions since mid-March 2020. These restrictions  + 1 
had no noticeable negative impact on the process of pre paring the balance of payments and thus on the overall  
0 
quality of the results. However, the data sources for the  – 1 
items “travel” and “income from direct investment” are  more limited or subject to greater uncertainty than usual.  – 2 
These items could therefore potentially undergo significant  revision going forward. 
– 3 
2 The threshold of 6% of GDP set by the European Com 
Recovery in the  current account  surplus at year 
end obscures  partially counter vailing crisis 
related develop ments in the  sub-accounts 
1999 00 05 10 15 20 
1 Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics,  including supplementary trade items, with freight and insur ance costs also being deducted from imports. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
mission as part of the procedure for preventing and cor recting macroeconomic imbalances thus continued to be  exceeded. In its in-depth review as part of the 2021 Euro pean Semester, the European Commission once again clas sified Germany as having macroeconomic imbalances. See  European Commission (2021). 
Unfavourable  underlying con ditions around  the world in  light of reces sion in global  economy and  
in trade during the global financial crisis. The  fall in international goods trade was, however,  significantly faster and the subsequent recovery  took hold more quickly than it had back then,  which meant that global trade exceeded its  
Price and volume effects on the  German foreign trade balance* 
€ billion 
260 


	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Annual percentage change
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report 
March 2021 
19
considerable  decline in global  trade 
pre-crisis level by the end of the year. While the  trade shock hit virtually all of Germany’s part ner countries at the same time, China, for ex ample, saw a stronger and faster recovery in  demand for imports than other countries due  to its early and seemingly radical measures to  contain the pandemic. In light of the magni tude of the demand shock, the slight appreci ation of the euro in the reporting year is likely  to have had hardly any bearing. Significant de clines in the prices of intermediate goods and  commodities, especially crude oil, provided re lief for the German economy. A barrel of Brent  crude oil cost an average of just over US$42 in  2020 – roughly one-third less than in the previ 
230 200 170 
140 
Log scale 
Foreign trade balance
Lin scale 
of which 
Volume effect
Price effect
+ 90 + 60 + 30 0 
– 30 – 60 – 90 
Weak global  demand and  composition  effects reduced  
Germany’s  
foreign trade  surplus; counter vailing price  
effects 
Surplus position  declining vis-à vis third coun tries, but  
unchanged vis à-vis euro area  countries 
ous year. 
Goods exports declined sharply as a result of  the collapse in global demand as well as the  temporary business closures and disruptions to  international supply chains. In addition, com 
position effects weighed on German export  sales, as the global recession hit the capital  goods sector particularly hard. Imports likewise  fell, but to a lesser extent than exports. On bal 
ance, the foreign trade surplus decreased by  €44 billion to €180 billion in 2020. In this con text, price effects resulting from more favour able import prices significantly dampened the  volume-related decline. 
In regional terms, the decrease in the current  account surplus was attributable to a decline in  the balance vis-à-vis countries outside of the  euro area (from 5% to 4½% of GDP). Here, the  decreases in the goods trade balance and pri 
mary income balance were larger than the in creases in the services account. At the same  time, the current account balance vis-à-vis euro  area countries remained almost unchanged at  2½% of GDP, as countervailing crisis-related  developments in the sub-accounts largely bal anced each other out. 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Decomposed using the Shapley-Siegel index. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
The decline in the current account balance is  also reflected in the developments in domestic  saving and investment. Although investment in  Germany decreased, domestic saving fell to an  even greater extent.3 Highly heterogeneous  changes between sectors were also observed  in this context. Enterprises’ investment in ma 
chinery and equipment dropped massively in  light of both the collapse in demand as well as  the uncertainty surrounding the economic out look. By contrast, private housing investment  and government investment proved to be ro bust. In the reporting year, there was a surge in  household saving, as consumer expenditure fell  considerably more sharply than disposable in come. Here, the key factor was that certain op portunities for consumption were either un available or not utilised by consumers due to  
3 As in previous years, the comments in this Report are  based on revised figures from the balance of payments for  the past four years. The figures on the fiscal balance from  the national accounts do not yet factor in these revisions. 
Considerable  declines in  
investment and  aggregate  
savings 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
20
Savings and investment in the German  
economy 
As a percentage of GDP 
29Savings1 


	

	

	

	

	

	

	Gross capital formation
	Net lending/net borrowing
	

	Financial corporationsNon-financial corporations
	

	Households and non-profit institutions serving households General government
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



26 
23 
20 
17 
Goods flows and balance of  trade 
In the first half of 2020, German foreign trade  activities declined massively due to pandemic related containment measures and changes in  behaviour both in Germany and abroad. The  sharp downturn was fuelled by the fact that, in  addition to sales channels being affected, the  goods supply experienced disruptions at times  as a result of business closures and missed de liveries. At the low point in the second quarter,  
Foreign trade  sees very sharp  decline in first  half of the year,  followed by  strong recovery 
of which 
2 
1991 95 00 05 10 15 20 
+15 +12 + 9 + 6 + 3 0 
– 3 – 6 – 9 –12 
goods exports and goods imports were around  one-quarter and one-eighth below their re spective pre-crisis levels in price-adjusted terms.  As coronavirus containment measures were  eased, exports and imports of goods caught up  quickly in the summer and continued to re cover during the autumn despite the renewed  tightening of pandemic-related restrictions. In  this context, a key role was played by the rising  industrial activity in Germany and its partner  countries at this time. In the final quarter of the  year, exports still fell short of their pre-crisis  level in real terms by around 4%, whilst imports  had already surpassed their pre-crisis level. 
On average over the year, goods exports in  2020 were down 8¾% on the year in price adjusted terms. With a price-adjusted decline  
Exports  
more strongly  diminished than  
1 lncluding consumption of fixed capital. 2 One-off effect  caused mainly by assumption of Treuhand debt by general  government. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
the risk of infection.4 At the same time, saving  among non-financial corporations remained  largely unchanged. However, the government  budget posted a strong deficit after having re 
corded a surplus the year before. The govern ment deficit is, alongside the impact of the  automatic stabilisers, primarily attributable to  the comprehensive government measures  aimed to support the healthcare system, house holds, and enterprises.5 On balance, net lend ing by households and non-financial corpor ations rose to a very significant degree, while  the general government fiscal balance fell con siderably. 
of 3%, goods imports fell to a lesser extent  than exports. Here, a contributing factor was  the fact that, compared to exports, the range  of imported goods is less strongly focused on  certain capital goods such as machinery or  motor vehicles; international trade in these  goods decreased especially sharply. Further 
more, there was increased domestic demand  for computer and telecommunications technol ogy as well as for specific consumer goods  such as pharmaceutical products and textile  protective equipment, which were increasingly  sourced from abroad. 
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a). 
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021). 
imports on aver age in 2020 
Very sharp  
decline in  
exports to the  euro area and  to sales regions  outside of the  euro area 
In regional terms, German exporters saw their  revenue fall in practically every euro area coun try. In this context, especially hard hit were de liveries to France – which was chiefly due to  the decline in other transport equipment  –  Spain, and Portugal.6 After price adjustment,  exports to countries outside of the euro area  
Foreign trade by region 
% 
Per 
cent 
age  
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
21
Annual percentage 
Country/ 
share 
change 
decreased almost as sharply as those to euro  area countries. Revenue from sales to the  
group of countries Exports 
2020 
	2018 
	2019 
	



2020 
Exports of cap ital goods and  intermediate  goods nega tively impacted 
United Kingdom experienced a particularly  strong decline, with both the relatively sharp  drop in UK demand as well as composition  effects playing a part. Export business with the  United States likewise contracted sharply. In  addition, there was a very steep decline in de 
liveries to commodity-exporting countries such  as Russia and the OPEC countries, with their  more limited scope for expenditure from their  sales of oil and gas likely being a contributing  factor. Heterogeneous developments were ob 
served in export business to Asian countries.  While deliveries to the emerging market econ omies in South and East Asia as well as to  Japan saw relatively sharp declines, sales to  China almost reached the previous year’s level.  These sales benefited from the fact that the  Chinese economy had already passed the peak  of the pandemic in the first quarter of 2020  and subsequently saw a considerable recovery,  which meant that goods exports to China in  the final quarter were markedly up on the year. 
Among the exports of intermediate and capital  goods, exports of motor vehicles, trailers and  semi-trailers contracted especially sharply in the  previous year in price-adjusted terms. In this  context, a role was played by the fact that pro 
duction and sales were, at times, almost  brought to a standstill in the spring due to slug gish deliveries from within Germany and from  abroad as well as due to the government mandated closures of businesses and show rooms. A very considerable downturn was ex 
6 Germany’s foreign trade in other transport equipment  comprises, in particular, ships, railway locomotives and roll ing stock, as well as – especially for bilateral trade with the  countries involved in the joint European manufacturing  arrangement – aircraft and spacecraft. 
Euro area 36.6 4.5 0.0 – 10.4 Other countries 63.4 2.1 1.3 –  8.6 of which: 
United Kingdom 5.6 –  3.8 –  3.6 – 15.5 Central and  
eastern European  
EU countries1 12.6 6.7 2.6 –  6.2 Switzerland 4.7 0.2 4.3 –  0.1 Russia 1.9 0.5 2.6 – 13.1 United States 8.6 1.4 4.7 – 12.5 Japan 1.4 4.6 1.1 – 15.9 
Newly industrial 
ised economies  
in Asia2 3.1 0.7 –  2.4 –  1.6 China 8.0 8.0 3.2 –  0.1 South and east  
Asian emerging  
market economies3 2.2 13.0 –  0.7 – 17.5 OPEC 1.6 – 16.2 –  2.7 – 13.9 All countries 100.0 3.0 0.8 –  9.3 
Imports 
Euro area 36.4 7.2 1.0 –  9.0 Other countries 63.6 4.7 1.7 –  6.0 of which: 
United Kingdom 3.4 0.6 3.7 –  9.6 Central and  
eastern European  
EU countries1 14.5 6.3 2.7 –  4.6 Switzerland 4.4 0.5 –  0.2 –  0.9 Russia 2.1 14.7 – 13.1 – 29.9 United States 6.6 4.2 10.6 –  5.0 Japan 2.1 3.3 0.8 – 11.0 
Newly industrial 
ised economies  
in Asia2 2.7 6.0 –  3.0 –  7.7 China 11.3 4.2 3.8 5.6 South and east  
Asian emerging  
market economies3 3.9 2.3 0.3 –  3.4 OPEC 0.5 21.5 –  4.8 – 48.4 All countries 100.0 5.6 1.4 –  7.1 
1 Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania.  2 Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan. 3 India, Indo nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
22
Foreign trade by selected categories of goods in 2020 Percentage share 
Exports 
Agricultural goods 
Imports 
0.9 Unclassifiable goods 
Agricultural goods 
Unclassifiable goods 
Energy 1.7 
Consumer 
3.0 
Intermediate 
3.4 
Intermediate 
5.0 
Energy 
goods 
20.4 
of which: Motor 
vehicles 
15.6 
goods 
31.5 
Capital goods 
42.5 
Consumer goods 
24.0 
6.4 
of which: 
Motor 
vehicles 
10.9 
goods 
30.0 
Capital goods 31.4 
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. May not add up to 100% due to rounding. Deutsche Bundesbank 
Imports of cap ital goods and  intermediate  goods in  
decline, imports  of consumer  goods see sharp  rise due to  
pharmaceuticals  and protective  equipment 
perienced by exports of other transport equip ment, such as aircraft, which suffered under  the highly depressed outlook for global travel  resulting from the pandemic. In addition, sig nificant cutbacks had to be made by exporters  of traditional capital goods such as machinery,  as the acquisition of these goods was especially  curtailed due to the elevated uncertainty; at  the end of the year, deliveries still fell consider ably short of the previous year’s level. Less  strongly affected were deliveries of computer,  electronic, and optical products as well as  metals and fabricated metal products as a  whole, electrical equipment and chemicals to  foreign countries. At the same time, among  consumer goods, global demand for German  pharmaceutical products rose. 
In terms of deliveries to Germany, manufactur ers of machinery and equipment and, in par ticular, manufacturers of motor vehicles, trailers  and semi-trailers abroad recorded sharp down turns on average in 2020, though their receipts  were practically at pre-crisis levels in the final  quarter. In the reporting year, there was a con siderable fall in imports of other transport  equipment. The losses suffered by manufactur ers of metals and fabricated metal products as  a whole and manufacturers of chemicals were  less severe. By contrast, there was noticeable  expansion in deliveries of electrical equipment  
as well as computer, electronic, and optical  products to Germany. In this context, the  greater expenditure for imports of computer  and telecommunications technology is likely to  have been attributable to the increased digital 
isation of work and telework activities as a re sult of the coronavirus pandemic. Imports of  consumer goods saw strong growth, which  was fuelled in part by the considerable expan sion in deliveries of pharmaceutical products  and textile protective equipment (such as face  coverings). 
In regional terms, there were declines in goods  imports from almost all of Germany’s major  partner countries, with euro area producers  suffering more than manufacturers in other  countries from the fall in German demand. A  notable exception was China, which recorded  strong growth in revenue from business with  Germany. The most important factor in this re 
gard was that China supplied the majority of  Germany’s coronavirus-related import demand  for textile protective equipment, such as face  coverings.7 In addition, a large proportion of  the increased imports of computer and periph 
eral equipment also originated from China. Ex cluding China, imports from third countries fell  almost as sharply in terms of value as those  
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b). 
Strong decline in  demand for  
imports from  euro area and  third countries;  significant rise in  imports from  China 
Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report 
March 2021 
23
Supplementary  trade items see  strong increase  on balance, net  
receipts in mer chanting trade  slightly lower 
Turnover in ser vices down mas sively, with trad itionally large  deficit giving  way to slim  
surplus 
from the euro area. In this context, other major  suppliers from South and East Asia as well as  central and eastern European EU Member  States, the United Kingdom and the United  States suffered significant declines in their sales  to Germany. Revenue among major energy  suppliers such as Russia and the OPEC coun 
tries experienced very considerable contraction,  with the fall in the prices of energy products  playing a role. 
The other components of goods trade – which  comprises supplementary trade items, net  goods exports in merchanting trade, and trade  in non-monetary gold – had a countervailing  effect overall on the decline in the balance of  foreign trade. In 2020, the balance of goods  trade fell by €27 billion in net terms and thus  less sharply than the balance of foreign trade.  The decisive factor here was the lower negative  balance in the supplementary trade items,  which, amongst other things, was attributable  to the subdued activities in contract process ing. At the same time, there was a slight de 
crease in net receipts from merchanting trade,  as sales declined to a greater extent than pur chases overall. The automotive industry con tributed to this as it generally comprises a large  proportion of these transactions. The balance  of trade in non-monetary gold remained essen tially unchanged. 
Invisible current transactions 
Cross-border trade in services was impaired by  the pandemic to an even greater extent than  trade in goods. In comparison with the decline  in the wake of the financial and economic crisis  of 2008-09, the fluctuations in 2020 were also  greater. Receipts from the export of services fell  by nearly 14% on the year, whilst expenditure  on services from abroad fell by nearly one-fifth.  The balance of the services account, which  traditionally runs a large deficit in Germany, re corded a slight surplus last year, following a  deficit of €20½ billion in the year prior to the  pandemic. 
The main reason for the large deficit in the ser vices account in the past was the high expend iture on travel abroad by German residents. In  connection with the travel warnings and re strictions to contain the pandemic – including  border closures in some cases – this position  shrunk by more than half from over €83 billion  in 2019 to €36 billion last year. Whilst expend iture on trips to Germany’s neighbours was  down by nearly one-half, which is already a  huge fall, expenditure on long-haul journeys  plummeted by more than three-quarters. Fur thermore, travel receipts from non-residents  also fell by nearly half to €19½ billion. For trips  to Germany, a large role was played by the  sharp decline in travel for trade fairs, events  and business trips. Overall, the deficit in the  travel account fell from €46 billion to €16½ bil lion in 2020, and thus to the lowest level since  German reunification. 
Due to the slump in economic activity last year  in Germany and abroad, turnover fell in nearly  all other sub-items of the services account. As a  result of the decline in the trade in goods, both  receipts for and expenditure on transport ser 
vices fell considerably. In contrast to the bal ance in the travel account, the balance in the  transport services account had the effect of  considerably reducing the surplus, as receipts in  this position fell by €14½ billion, which was  significantly greater than the fall in expend iture. Other sub-items of the services account  related to the trade in goods, such as manufac turing, maintenance and repair services, re corded only marginal changes in the balance  compared to 2019, though turnover here was  likewise lower. 
Trade in knowledge-based services and other  business services also suffered a setback in the  reporting year, following years of strong  growth in the international division of labour.  Nonetheless, the large surplus in the use of in 
tellectual property remained virtually un changed. Stable earnings from cross-border  communication and IT services coupled with  simultaneously falling expenditure led to a con 
Sharp contrac tion in travel  account deficit 
For transport  services, fall in  expenditure out stripped by fall  in receipts 
Contraction in  volume of  
knowledge 
based and busi ness services,  with overall bal ance virtually  unchanged 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
24
Key indicators of the cross-border  
investment income balance 
€ billion 
Q3 
and expenditure by €3 billion, causing a slight  decline to the surplus in this sub-account. 
Germany’s primary income from abroad ex 
Considerable fall  
2,400 2,100 1,800 1,500 1,200 900 
600 
300 
0 
% 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 


	

	

	

	

	

	Net external assets
	1
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Investment 
income balance
	

	

	(enlarged scale)
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Yield 2
	

	

	

	

	

	

	Assets
	

	

	

	

	

	Liabilities
	

	



€ billion 
+120 
+ 90 
+ 60 
+ 30 
0 
– 30 
ceeded its corresponding payments to the rest  of the world by €92½ billion in the reporting  year. As in previous years, cross-border invest ment income accounted for the lion’s share of  primary income, while flows of employee com pensation led to a slight surplus and flows of  other primary income resulted in a slight def icit. The coronavirus pandemic also had a con siderable impact on cross-border investment in come in the year under review. The surplus fell  by €20 billion and, according to provisional cal culations, totalled €91½ billion, after having  risen very substantially in the preceding years.8 In this context, income to residents from their  investments abroad plummeted by one-sixth to  €175½ billion. However, payments to investors  and capital donors from abroad fell less  strongly, down by one-seventh to €84 billion.  In arithmetical terms, the fall in net receipts is  fully attributable to the lower net earnings  from direct investment.9 
Cross-border secondary income – which con 
in investment  income surplus 
Marginally  
Expansion in  financial services 
1999 00 05 10 15 20 
1 Direct, portfolio and other investment and reserve assets. Ex cluding financial derivatives. 2 Yields shown in terms of invest ment income/expenditure as a percentage of the annual aver age levels of foreign assets and liabilities. IIP as at the end of  
Q3 2020. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
traction of nearly €3 billion in the deficit in this  sub-account. However, the deficit in other busi ness services grew by €2 billion, as earnings  from abroad from research and development,  professional, technical and commercial ser vices, as well as management consultancy ser vices fell to a greater extent than expenditure  in these categories. 
While most positions in the services account  contracted, financial services constituted an  exception. There were barely any changes on  the year for insurance activities, either on the  receipts or the expenditure side. Nonetheless,  receipts for financial services grew by €2 billion  
sists of unilateral transfers – saw its deficit rise  by €3 billion in the reporting year to €51½ bil lion. This was mainly attributable to increased  payments to the rest of the world. General  government payments increased by €4 billion,  around half of which was attributable to cur rent transfers relating to international cooper ation and the other half to contributions to the  EU budget. One factor in this was that Germa ny’s payment obligations increased as a result  of the United Kingdom’s departure from the  
8 Final figures for direct investment income are not avail able until three years after they have been received and the  reports they are based on have been examined – currently,  
this means they are available up to and including 2017. 9 The 2020 annual figure for income from direct invest ment is based on two basic methodological changes re quired by Eurostat, with retroactive effect from 2017. For  one thing, direct investment now includes not only the  reinvested earnings of direct investments, but also the  retained earnings of indirect investments. Furthermore, ex penditure on research and development and associated de preciation and write-downs are taken into account in the  earnings. 
higher deficit in  secondary  
income balance 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
25
Update of the international standards for external sector  statistics and the system of national accounts 
The external sector statistics and the system  of national accounts provide key macroeco nomic indicators, such as the current ac count balance, net international investment  position and gross domestic product, which  can be used to assess a country’s economic  and fi nancial situation. They form an indis pensable foundation for monetary and eco nomic policy decision- making, enterprises’  business policy considerations, and also  analysis and forecasting in research and  academia. As, in the world of today, eco nomic relationships between individual eco nomic agents as well as between entire na tional economies are in a constant state of  fl ux, the underlying statistical measurement  concepts and methodologies behind these  indicators must be reviewed on a regular  basis in order to determine, for example,  whether the increasing development of  international production chains by multi national enterprise groups is being correctly  captured and appropriately refl ected in the  macroeconomic core indicators. In March  2020, the International Monetary Fund  (IMF) and the United Nations Statistical  Commission initiated a comprehensive up date of the underlying macrostatistical  framework, which is formed by the Balance  of Payments and International Investment  Position Manual (BPM6) and the System of  National Accounts (SNA 2008).1,2 These  international statistical standards are sub ject to extensive updates of this kind around  every 20 years. 
The overarching aim is to enable the exter nal sector statistics and the system of na tional accounts to more accurately depict  more recent and increasingly relevant  macroeconomic developments such as  globalisation, digitalisation, fi ntech, and  
sustainability. At the same time, the gaps  and ambiguities that have become appar ent since the last revision process are in tended to be rectifi ed. In order for this to  be achieved, existing concepts (model as sumptions) need to be reassessed and ad justed if necessary, and the data collection  and estimation methodologies must be ex panded and refi ned.3 
The update process is divided into two  phases. In Phase I, which will run until the  spring of 2022, task teams of international  experts recruited from national central  banks and statistical offi ces as well as inter 
national organisations around the world are  developing proposals for adjustments,  
1 These international manuals set out statistical con cepts and methodologies. The principal document  governing the balance of payments and international  investment position is the IMF’s Balance of Payments  and International Investment Position Manual, Sixth  Edition (BPM6). See International Monetary Fund  (2009). The framework governing the national ac counts is the United Nations’ System of National   Accounts (SNA 2008). See European Commission et al.  (2009). 
2 For EU Member States, the statistical reporting re quirements based on these are laid down in regula tions adopted by the European Commission (Regula tion (EC) No  184/ 2005 of 12  January 2005 and  
amending regulations, most recently (EU) 2016/ 1031  of 8 June 2016). Moreover, the reporting requirements  for Eurosystem national central banks vis- à- vis the  European Central Bank (ECB) are stipulated in detail in  an ECB guideline. As of March 2021, reporting require 
ments are governed by Guideline (EU) 2018/ 1151 of  the European Central Bank of 2 August 2018 amend ing Guideline ECB/ 2011/ 23 on the statistical reporting  requirements of the European Central Bank in the fi eld  of external statistics (ECB/ 2018/ 19). 
3 With regard to the respective national practices for  producing external sector statistics, it should be taken  into account that the international manuals as well as  the EU Regulation and ECB Guideline are conceptual  parameters for the respective statistical output (“out 
put orientation”). The question of which data collec tion methods provide the conceptually desired infor mation in each individual case is a matter for each na tional producer of offi cial statistics and their own stat istical expertise and depends not least on the economic  
structures of the respective country. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
26
The procedure from draft to approval of  
a guidance note 
new system. The complex organisational  structure and the approval process in the  current update cycle are intended to ensure  
Status 
Proposal by  
team of authors 
Revised guidance note 
Final 
draft 
if significant 
changes 
Joint 
approval 
if differences 
of opinion 
Publication 
Bodies involved 
Review by task team,  revision by team of  authors (1-2 weeks) 
First review by  
BPTT / AEG,1 revision  by team of authors  (1-2 weeks) 
Public consultation (4 weeks) 
Second review 
by BPTT / AEG 
Submission of final  draft to BOPCOM,  AEG / ISWGNA2 
Settlement by 
chair of 
BOPCOM / ISWGNA 
Final resolution on  SNA update by United  Nations Statistical  Commission; final res olution on BPM up date by BOPCOM 
extensive consistency between the external  sector statistics and the system of national  accounts. This will be crucial for amalgam ating and comparing statistical results at  both the national and international levels. 
The variety of topics identifi ed over recent  years have been divided into a number of  blocks. The three topic areas that primarily  concern the external sector are the respon 
sibility of the IMF Committee on Balance of  Payments Statistics (BOPCOM).5 Due to the  thematic overlap with the national ac counts, statisticians from both fi elds are  represented in fi ve additional task teams.6 The Bundesbank also participates in these  committees and task teams. 
The Balance of Payments Task Team (BPTT)  is responsible for overarching conceptual  issues concerning external sector statistics.  In particular, additions to the international  investment position aim to improve its ana 
1 Advisory Expert Group on National Accounts. Guidance  notes from the DITT are also reviewed by the Working Group  on International Investment Statistics (WGIIS). 2 Intersecretariat  Working Group on National Accounts. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
amendments and additions to each man ual. The guidance notes drawn up by these  task teams will then undergo a multi- stage  approval process, which also includes a  public consultation period in which all  stakeholders can participate via the IMF  website.4 Phase II will involve incorporating  the approved guidance notes into the draft  versions of the new manuals as well as con ducting additional rounds of consultation;  this phase is scheduled to be completed in  spring 2025. In the years thereafter, Euro pean data reporting requirements will be  adjusted and, fi nally, the German external  sector statistics will be switched over to the  
lytical potential, including with regard to as sessing a country’s asset and debt pos 
4 See https://www.imf.org/en/Data/Statistics/BPM.  Comments can be submitted via the websites of the  individual task teams. A public consultation period of  four weeks, which will begin at different times de 
pending on the progress of the work, is scheduled for  each guidance note. 
5 The committee, which was established in 1992, ad vises the IMF on methodological and conceptual issues  in the context of balance of payments and inter national investment position statistics. At present, its  membership consists of 15 external sector statisticians  from national central banks and additional representa tives from international organisations. For more infor mation, see https://www.imf.org/external/bopage/ bopindex.htm. 
6 Alongside the BOPCOM, these fi ve task teams also  work in conjunction with the Intersecretariat Working  Group on National Accounts (ISWGNA). The ISWGNA  is an interagency body set up by the United Nations  Statistical Commission in the early 1980s which coord 
inates the statistical work of international organisa tions. The fi ve members of the ISWGNA are the Euro pean Commission, the IMF, the Organisation for Eco nomic Co- operation and Development (OECD), the  
United Nations (UN), and the World Bank. 
Committees and task teams in the update process 
ISWGNA1 
Intersecretariat Working Group 
on National Accounts 
Support and 
coordination 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
27
BOPCOM 
Committee on Balance of Payments Statistics 
DZTT 
Digitalization Task Team 
WSTT 
Wellbeing and Sustainability Task Team 
AEG 
Advisory Expert Group on National Accounts 
BPTT 
Balance 
of Payments Task Team 
DITT 
Direct 
Investment Task Team 
CATT 
Current Account Task Team 
FITT 
GZTT 
ISWGNA / BOPCOM Joint Task Teams IFTT 
IETT 
CMTT 
Financial and 
Payments 
Systems Task Team 
Globalization Task Team 
Islamic Finance Task Team 
Informal Economy Task Team 
Communications Task Team 
1 Joint committee consisting of the European Commission, International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development, United Nations and World Bank. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
itions. A detailed account explaining bal ance sheet changes in the international in vestment position is envisaged as a new  standard component of the statistics and,  at the international level, is intended to be  incorporated into the IMF’s External Sector  Report, amongst other publications. While  this is already standard practice in most  European countries, the Bundesbank ex pects that valuable analytical insight will be  gained from regularly publishing these data  in other countries as well. Furthermore, for  the fi rst time, the new balance of payments  manual will discuss the introduction of a  standardised defi nition of net international  reserves as well as how these are reported.  Net international reserves are a metric that  also play a major role in the context of IMF  lending programmes. The goal is to more  transparently capture the international re serves actually available to a given country.  The task team is also investigating the pos sibilities of recording “sustainable fi nancing  
instruments” separately in the accounting  systems. This is part of a topic area that the  Bundesbank is working on with high prior ity at various levels. 
The Current Account Task Team (CATT) pro vides consultation on issues including how  global phenomena – such as the growing  cross- border activities of what are known as  “factoryless goods producers”  – can be  measured more effectively. Likewise, the  multifaceted impacts of globalisation and  digitalisation have necessitated, amongst  other things, clearer delineation between  trade in goods and trade in services as well  as an expanded depiction of trade accord 
ing to enterprise characteristics in order to  better identify the role of multinational  groups. As the current account refl ects the  global production structures of these agents  and their corresponding repercussions on  national value added, there is broad cross 
over with the Globalization Task Team  
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
28
(GZTT) in this subject area. In light of Ger 
many’s signifi cant degree of interconnect 
edness in global trade and international  
value chains, the treatment of these topics  
plays a key role for the Bundesbank since  
they have an impact on Germany’s macro 
economic results and indicators as well. 
A major challenge facing the Direct Invest 
ment Task Team (DITT) is establishing a  
clearer distinction between foreign direct  
investment fl ows and foreign direct invest 
ment stocks with regard to business object 
ives. This comprises topics such as the def 
inition and identifi cation of the country of  
ultimate ownership of a corporate associ 
ation or the actual country of investment,  
differentiated treatment of direct invest 
ment for the purpose of creating new pro 
duction capacity as compared with pure  
corporate restructuring, and the statistical  
recording of corporate inversions of multi 
national groups. Alongside improved possi 
bilities for analysis, this also presents poten 
tial repercussions on real economic indica 
tors – such as the current account (via in 
come fl ows) – that must likewise be taken  
into consideration and weighed up appro 
priately. 
Of the approximately 75 total guidance  
notes that need to be drawn up by the vari 
ous task teams, around 20 have been sub 
mitted at present. The guidance notes that  
have already been subject to discussion il 
lustrate the fact that the authors mostly do  
not want to change the conceptual prin 
ciples of the statistical accounting system,  
but would prefer to maintain the existing  
framework, including the territorial system  
and the measurement of transfers of eco 
nomic ownership. Instead, they are propos 
ing additions and adjustments to the break 
downs that need to be reported in order to  
meet new analytical requirements. From the  
Bundesbank’s perspective, this is a funda 
mentally welcome development, as the  existing conceptual principles continue to  be analytically relevant despite the more re cent phenomena mentioned above. How ever, care must be taken to avoid overload ing the macroeconomic accounting systems  with excessively detailed requirements. In  this regard, the Bundesbank believes that  the relevant data should be taken from the  baseline statistics, such as the foreign trade  statistics or trade in services statistics, or  that adjustments should be made to those  statistics instead, if necessary. 
Germany’s net  capital exports  higher than in  previous year 
EU. By contrast, there was a slight decline in  private payments to the rest of the world, des pite somewhat higher remittances from immi grants to their countries of origin. Transfers  from the rest of the world to general govern ment fell slightly due to a decline in the tax col lected on non-residents’ income and assets. 
Capital movements 
Underlying trends  
in capital movements 
In 2020, Germany’s current account surplus  was mirrored by net capital exports of €227½  billion.10 In portfolio investment, purchases of  foreign assets by residents outweighed pur 
chases of German securities by non-resident in vestors. Transactions in financial derivatives and  other investments also led to outflows of funds,  while direct investment saw inflows and out flows of funds in roughly equal measure.  Alongside the fundamental economic factors  that determined the current account balance  to some extent, the pandemic-related uncer tainty in particular had an impact on German  capital flows over the course of the year. This  uncertainty was very high in the first half of the  year in particular. Following the strong eco nomic downturn in the second quarter, mas sive monetary policy interventions and exten sive government support measures – alongside  subsequent progress in the development of  vaccines  – led to the resumption of positive  tendencies in economies and the financial mar kets.11 In the German financial account, these  factors had an impact not only on portfolio in vestment, but also on other investment, with  
10 Germany’s net capital exports rose slightly last year in  spite of the fall in Germany’s current account surplus. Diver gent developments in current and financial transactions  can result from different recording and reporting systems  and from reporting errors. Potential discrepancies are re corded in errors and omissions. While these had been  markedly negative in 2019, they were vanishingly small in  2020. 
11 On the effect of the pandemic containment measures  of foreign governments on Germany’s cross-border capital  flows, see the box on pp. 33 ff. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
29
Major items of the balance of payments 
€ billion 
Item 2018r 2019r 2020r 
I. Current account + 264.2 + 258.6 + 231.9 
1. Goods + 224.6 + 216.5 + 189.4 
Receipts 1,292.9 1,304.7 1,190.4 
Expenditure 1,068.3 1,088.2 1,001.0 
Memo item: 
Foreign trade1 + 228.7 + 224.0 + 179.8 
Exports 1,317.4 1,328.2 1,205.1 
Imports 1,088.7 1,104.1 1,025.4 
2. Services –  17.4 –  20.7 +  1.6 
of which: 
Travel –  44.5 –  45.9 –  16.5 
3. Primary income + 105.7 + 111.2 +  92.5 
of which: 
Investment income + 107.9 + 111.8 +  91.6 
4. Secondary income –  48.7 –  48.4 –  51.6 
II. Capital account +  0.7 –  0.5 –  4.8 
III. Financial account balance2 + 246.5 + 203.8 + 227.6 
1. Direct investment +  20.5 +  76.1 –  0.6 
2. Portfolio investment + 153.6 +  73.4 +  42.7 
3. Financial derivatives3 +  22.5 +  24.5 +  99.1 
4. Other investment4 +  49.5 +  30.3 +  86.5 
5. Reserve assets +  0.4 –  0.5 –  0.1 
IV. Errors and omissions5 –  18.3 –  54.3 +  0.5 
1 Special trade according to the offi cial foreign trade statistics  
(source: Federal Statistical Offi ce). 2 Increase in net external pos 
ition: + / decrease in net external position: –. 3 Balance of trans 
actions arising from options and fi nancial futures contracts as  
well as employee stock options. 4 Includes, in particular, loans  
and trade credits as well as currency and deposits. 5 Statistical  
errors and omissions resulting from the difference between the  
balance on the fi nancial account and the balances on the cur 
rent account and the capital account. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
30
Major items of the German balance of 
payments 
Balances in € billion 
ance, following a rise of €137 billion in the pre vious year. Resident investors purchased for eign equities and mutual fund shares in extra ordinarily large volumes amounting to €66 bil 
Current account 
Financial account 1 
Direct investment 
Portfolio 
investment 
Financial 
derivatives 
Other 
investment2 
Errors and 
omissions 3 
2020 2019 
lion and €64½ billion respectively. The fact that  some foreign financial markets, such as the  stock markets in the United States and China,  outperformed those in Germany may have  played a part in this. In addition to purchasing  equities from the United States –  which ac 
counted for more than one-third of all net pur chases – residents also purchased large quan tities of European corporate equities. 
Furthermore, resident investors purchased for eign debt securities totalling €56 billion in net  terms, of which €54 billion were bonds. The  acquisition of bonds from foreign issuers thus  roughly matched the level of the previous year,  but the focus changed from euro-denominated  
… as well as  debt securities 
paper to foreign currency bonds. One motive  
for the changed investor behaviour is likely to  
be the comparatively high bond yields in some  
third countries. However, the appreciation of  
the euro against many other major currencies,  
such as the US dollar, the yen and the pound  
sterling in the course of 2020 as a whole had a  
negative impact on the yields converted into  
euro. Roughly mirroring purchases of foreign  
equities, approximately one-quarter of total in 
vestments in foreign bonds was in US paper. By  
contrast, money market paper did not play a  
major role in German investment abroad, with  
acquisitions amounting to €2 billion. The main  
purchasers of foreign debt instruments were  
enterprises –  which also include investment  
companies and insurance corporations, for ex 
ample – and households. 
On balance,  
– 60 0 + 60 + 120 + 180 + 240 
1 Net capital exports: +. 2 Includes, in particular, loans and  trade credits as well as currency and deposits. 3 Statistical er rors and omissions. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
German TARGET2 claims once again rising  markedly, following a decline in the previous  year.12 
In addition, the Brexit-related intra-group re location of financial sector business segments  from the United Kingdom to Germany also had  an impact on Germany’s financial account.13 However, this was largely limited to gross cross border capital flows, with balances being only  marginally affected. 
Portfolio investment 
In 2020, portfolio investment saw net capital  
resident invest ors boosted  
their acquisitions  of equities and  mutual fund  
shares … 
exports of €42½ billion, which was the lowest  value since 2011 (2019: €73½ billion). This de cline has to be seen in the context of sharply  increasing capital flows in both directions. The  main reason for the net capital exports was  that domestic investors boosted their holdings  of foreign securities by €186½ billion on bal 
12 On the significance of the asset purchases on the devel opment of TARGET2 balances, see Deutsche Bundesbank  (2020c, 2017a). 
13 The United Kingdom exited the EU on 31 January 2020.  The withdrawal agreement stipulated that the United King dom would remain in the single European market until at  least the end of 2020, by which point a trade and cooper ation agreement was to be negotiated – which was indeed  concluded shortly before the year drew to a close. 
Significant rise in  gross portfolio  capital flows  due to Brexit 
Last year, foreign securities trading was again  perceptibly impacted by the United Kingdom’s  exit from the EU. This primarily concerned gross  bilateral flows with Germany, while the balance  
Portfolio investment in the German  balance of payments 
€ billion 
Shares 
Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report 
March 2021 
31
Inward portfolio  
remained largely unaffected. In order to ensure  + 
240 
that financial services that were previously per formed in London’s financial centre could con 
+ 
200 
tinue to be carried out for the EU after the UK  + 
160 
left the bloc in January 2020 and after the sub 
sequent transitional period until the end of  + 
120 
2020, financial corporations based in London  relocated parts of their securities activities to  + 
80 
their subsidiaries and branches abroad, for ex ample to those in Germany, and German enter + 
40 
prises moved similar activities out of their Lon don branches. This resulted in a marked rise in  
0 
transaction volumes in the German financial  – 
40 
account. The annual turnover of foreign  interest-bearing securities and equities rose  – 
80 
from €6 trillion in 2018 to €11½ trillion in 2019,  followed by €17½ trillion in 2020. 
– 
120 
Inward portfolio investment in Germany in  
Mutual fund shares


	Bonds
Money market instruments
	

	

	

	Balance
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Foreign  
investment in
	

	

	Germany
German  
investment abroad
	

	



2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 
investment in  Germany dom inated by trans actions in struc tured financial  products 
2020 recorded a balance of €144 billion, which  was a huge jump in demand from the previous  year (€63½ billion). Non-resident investors ac quired domestic bonds in the amount of €79½  billion. Of this, €70 billion was attributable to  structured products (warrants and certificates),  which have been classified as securities under  certain conditions since 2007. The high inflows  of funds in this area are predominantly attribut able to intra-group sales of these securities by  domestic issuing houses to their non-resident  parent and affiliated companies.14 In return,  domestic units acquired external assets in the  form of economically equivalent derivatives or  fixed-term deposits, which are recorded under  financial derivatives and other credit transac tions respectively. In addition, foreign investors  purchased additional private bonds in the  amount of €5 billion, and in comparison to  2019 shifted funds out of bank bonds and into  corporate bonds. Net investments in public  sector bonds were comparatively low at €1 bil lion. The purchases by foreign investors stood  in contrast to cross-border purchases of secur ities by the Bundesbank in the context of the  
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes.15 This led to some “carousel transactions” in  which foreign credit institutions first purchased  newly issued bonds from the Finance Agency  on the primary market and then later sold these  
14 Overall, as much as €94½ billion in debt securities was  attributable to warrants and certificates, as long-dated  paper was supplemented by corresponding short-dated  paper in the amount of €24 billion. This business model  already played an important role in portfolio flows in Ger 
many’s balance of payments even before the financial crisis  (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2008)). In the last two years,  the cross-border settlement of underwriting business in  structured products increased again considerably. One of  the main reasons for the surge in the reporting year was, in  particular, the restructuring measures carried out by key  market participants. In addition, alongside the efficient  technical conditions for securities issuance in Germany, the  implementation of the new EU Prospectus Regulation in  Germany in 2019 is likely to have contributed to the pick up in this market segment. For example, with the “Euro 
pean passport”, a single approval of the securities prospec tus by the national competent authority is sufficient for the  security to be listed on various EU exchanges. 15 The resumption of net purchases under the expanded  asset purchase programme (APP) at the turn of the year  2019/2020 and, in particular, the introduction of the pan demic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) in March  2020 took place in response to the drastic worsening of  the economic situation. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
32
Net purchases by non-residents of  
German private debt securities by type  
of security 
€ billion 
cates and warrants of issuing houses.16 In com parison, forward contracts, which had previ ously been the dominating position, increased  by a much smaller amount in 2020. Cross 
+ + + + + 
– 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
20 
2019 2020 
Certificates1 
Warrants1 
Other private debt securities 
border forward and futures contracts relating  to electricity and gas, which are also recorded  under financial derivatives, resulted in net cap ital imports totalling €3 billion. 
Direct investment 
The coronavirus pandemic left a considerable  mark on foreign direct investment (FDI) the  world over in 2020. The United Nations Con ference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)  estimates that global FDI flows last year fell by  42% compared with 2019.17 According to  UNCTAD’s assessment, the decline affected all  forms of FDI: mergers and acquisitions (M&As),  planned relocations of firms (greenfield pro 
UNCTAD diag noses significant  decline in global  foreign direct  investment flows  in 2020 
jects) and international project finance. Diver 
gent developments in individual countries and  
regions were behind this decline. The de 
veloped countries were hit particularly hard:  
according to UNCTAD data, FDI flows to this  
group of countries were down by 69% on the  
year. One factor was that multinational enter 
prises significantly reduced new equity invest 
ments on balance and, in some cases, even  
repatriated previously committed loans. At  
around 12% according to UNCTAD data, FDI  
flows to developing countries did not fall as  
precipitously. Here, too, there were great dif 
ferences according to country and region. 
Despite the difficult framework conditions, FDI  
flows from and to Germany have remained  
relatively buoyant. However, surveys point to  
the high burdens on German enterprises  
Net capital  
1 Securities that were classified as warrants or certificates in  the centralised securities database “Wertpapiermitteilungen”  and are legally debt securities pursuant to Section 793 of the  German Civil Code. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
on to the Bundesbank. On balance, there was  comparatively high demand from abroad for  money market paper (€80 billion), with foreign  investors adding almost exclusively public sec 
tor bonds to their portfolios. This reflects the  high issuance by the Federal Government in  this segment in connection with the corona virus pandemic and the government support  measures. On balance, non-residents only mar ginally increased their holdings of private  money market paper (€½ billion). They also dis posed of shares issued by German enterprises,  while purchases and sales of mutual fund  shares more or less balanced each other out. 
Financial derivatives, which are aggregated to  
Direct invest 
ment flows from  and to Germany  nearly equally  high 
exports of finan cial derivatives  dominated by  intra-group  
transactions 
form a single item in the balance of payments,  recorded net capital exports of €99 billion in  2020. This is a significant increase compared to  2019 (€24½ billion). This expansion can be ex 
plained for the most part by intra-group coun tertrades in the form of OTC options on the  aforementioned transactions involving certifi 
16 There have been net outflows of funds for financial de rivatives in most years since 2012. In the year under review,  as in previous years, the bulk of the outflows attributable  to futures contracts was constituted by settlement pay ments in connection with interest rate swaps concluded by  domestic credit institutions to hedge fixed-income secur ities against interest rate risk. 
17 See UNCTAD (2021). 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
33
How are foreign pandemic response measures affecting  Germany’s cross- border capital fl ows?* 
Since early 2020, the COVID- 19 pandemic  has been having a major impact on eco nomic activity. Across the globe, countries  temporarily took drastic measures to slow  the spread of the virus, such as border clos ures and national lockdowns. The macro economic repercussions of the pandemic  are far- reaching. The International Monet ary Fund estimates that global economic  growth fell by around 3.5% in 2020.1 The  World Trade Organization expects a drop in  world trade of around 10%.2 The impact of  the pandemic on cross- border capital fl ows  is less clear. At the onset of the crisis, some  countries experienced massive outfl ows of  capital as foreign investors withdrew capital  or domestic market participants transferred  capital abroad. However, the volume of  these outfIows was no higher than in earlier  periods of stress. The fl ight to safe havens  such as Germany was also only temporary.  This was due, not least, to the massive  monetary policy interventions by most cen tral banks. Lane (2020) argues that it was  
fected cross- border capital fl ows. This study  investigates how the policy measures of for eign governments in response to the  coronavirus pandemic affected bilateral  fi nan cial fl ows with Germany.3 
The analysis combines information from  two datasets. Data on Germany’s cross border capital fl ows are drawn from the  balance of payments statistics, using  monthly fi gures from January 2019 to  Decem ber 2020. On average, this dataset  includes around 26,000 reports and around  4,000 reporting entities per month. 
The chart below maps Germany’s capital in fl ows from and outfl ows to the rest of the  world and compares the fi gures for 2019  and 2020. Capital infl ows are defi ned as the  
Germany’s capital flows 
€ billion 
2019 2020 
primarily the Eurosystem’s pandemic emer gency purchase programme (PEPP) that  substantially supported the fi nancial mar kets from April 2020 onwards. Other cen tral banks in advanced economies also re sponded vigorously to the outbreak of the  pandemic. However, in addition to this un precedented provision of global liquidity,  government measures –  which differed  widely in some cases – are likely to have af 
* This analysis is based on a research paper by Gold bach and Nitsch (2021), Covid- 19 and Capital Flows:  The Responses of Investors to the Responses of Gov ernments, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper,  forthcoming. 
1 See International Monetary Fund (2021). 2 See World Trade Organization (2020). 
1,600 1,400 1,200 1,000 800 
600 
400 
Capital inflows1 
Capital outflows2 
J FMAM J J A S OND 
1,600 1,400 1,200 1,000 800 
600 
400 
3 This study focuses on measures taken by foreign  governments. The measures adopted by Germany  affect all bilateral transactions with its various partner  countries in the same way, which means that they  cannot be analysed using this data structure. 
1 Sale of foreign assets by German investors and purchase of  German assets by foreign investors. 2 Purchase of foreign as sets by German investors and sale of German assets by foreign  investors. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
34
Composite indicators of the OxCGRT * 
Outliers 
75th percentile 
information on how Germany’s partner  countries responded to the pandemic. This  analysis uses the Oxford COVID- 19 Govern ment Response Tracker (OxCGRT).6 This  
Median 
25th percentile 
Maximum 1.5 times interquartile range 
database systematically collects publicly  available information on policy measures  
100 80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
100 80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
Government response index 
Containment and health index 
Economic support index 
J FMAM J J A S OND 2020 
taken by governments in response to the  COVID- 19 pandemic, and encompasses a  total of 19 indicators. These are divided into  three categories: containment and closure  policies (eight indicators), health system  policies (seven indicators) and economic  support policies (four indicators). In add 
100 
ition, the dataset contains composite indi 80 
cators that map general developments in  the three aforementioned categories. These  
60 
have values between 0 and 100.7 The data  
40 
are available at a daily frequency beginning  
20 
in January 2020, for a total of 188 coun 
0 
tries. 
The adjacent chart presents boxplots of the  three composite indicators.8 The indicator  at the top (government response index)  combines 15 individual measures into one  value. The middle indicator (containment  and health index) aggregates the data from  13 individual measures intended to contain  
Source: Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker.  * The indices measure the response of foreign governments in  188 countries (excluding Germany) to the COVID-19 pandemic.  A higher value means that a country is more active. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
sale of foreign assets by German investors  and the purchase of German assets by for eign investors, while capital outfl ows are  defi ned as the purchase of foreign assets by  German investors and the sale of German  assets by foreign investors. It seems that  Germany’s gross capital fl ows (in both  direc tions) showed a year- on- year increase  in every month of 2020.4 However, the  chart also shows that, having been high in  March, capital fl ows fell sharply in April and  May 2020. They then recovered and rose  again perceptibly from August onwards.5 
The balance of payments data are supple mented with a second dataset containing  
4 This is partly due to the United Kingdom’s with drawal from the European Union. Banks domiciled in  the United Kingdom relocated parts of their inter national business to EU countries (including Germany).  This led to a dramatic increase in bilateral turnover be tween Germany and the UK in the trading of securities  from third countries. In addition, from November on wards, positive news regarding vaccines may have re duced uncertainty and stimulated cross- border capital  fl ows. 
5 In 2020, Germany’s capital fl ows showed a distinct  seasonal pattern, with comparatively high fi gures re corded in the last month of each quarter. This may  have been related to institutional investors’ fi nal end of- month transactions. These are taken into account in  the following estimates through time- specifi c fi xed ef fects. 
6 The dataset is available at https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/ research/research-projects/coronavirus- government response-tracker. 
7 The higher the value of the indicator, the more strin gent the containment measure or the more substantial  the intervention in the health system. A higher value  for the economic support indicators indicates greater  support. 
8 The composite indicators do not show all individual  measures but only the measures recorded ordinally. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
35
The effect of the pandemic containment measures of foreign governments on  Germany’s cross-border capital fl ows 
Baseline Including control variables 


Outfl ows (ln) 
	Infl ows (ln) 
	Total fl ows (ln) 
	Outfl ows (ln) 
	Infl ows (ln) 
	



Item 
Total fl ows (ln) 
Government response index  (index, 0-1) 
Containment and health index  (index, 0-1) 
Economic support index  (index, 0-1) 
– 0.765* (0.444) 
– 0.844* (0.441) 
0.149 
(0.143) 
– 0.763 (0.541) 
– 0.930* (0.521) 
0.259** (0.143) 
– 0.754 (0.469) 
– 0.881* (0.459) 
0.237 
(0.145) 
– 0.819* (0.448) 
– 0.872* (0.446) 
0.111 
(0.135) 
– 0.833 (0.543) 
– 0.969* (0.526) 
0.267* (0.132) 
– 0.821* (0.473) 
– 0.916* (0.465) 
0.194 
(0.135) 
Observations 771 771 771 771 771 771 Adjusted R² 0.967 0.971 0.973 0.967 0.971 0.973 
** Signifi cance at the 5% level, * signifi cance at the 10% level. Time-specifi c and country-specifi c fi xed effects are included but  not reported. Robust standard errors (clustered over months and countries) in parentheses. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
the virus and strengthen the health system.  The third index (economic support index)  comprises two measures aimed at support ing economic activity. The chart shows that,  as COVID- 19 spread from April 2020 on wards, measures were expanded consider ably. In addition, the boxplots show a wide  spread, which indicates a high degree of  variation among the countries. Another fac tor is that the pandemic affected the coun tries to varying degrees at different points  in time. The boxplots of the individual  measures, which are not depicted here,  point in the same direction. 
The empirical study uses the monthly vari ation at country level to identify the effect  of pandemic containment measures on  cross- border capital fl ows. The bilateral  fi nan cial relationships of countries with ex tensive measures are compared with those  that reacted less strongly to the pandemic.  A panel model with country- specifi c and  time- specifi c fi xed effects is estimated 
financial activityct = ↵ + βgovernment responsect + γcontrolsct 
+ σt + ⇡c + "ct, 
where financial activityct is a (logarith mised) measure of German capital fl ows  (outfl ows from Germany, infl ows to Ger 
many or Germany’s total capital fl ows)  with  country c in month t; government   responsect is the response of country c to  the pandemic in month t; controlsct is a  vector of additional control variables; σt stands for time- specifi c fi xed effects, while  πc represents country- specifi c fi xed effects. 
The original values of the explanatory in dices are between 0 and 100. For the esti mation, these are normalised between zero  and one. 
The above table provides the estimation re sults of the three composite indicators.  These results include all countries for which  the composite leading indicator of the  Organ isation for Economic Co- operation  and Development (real economic measure)  and the monthly growth rate of the central  bank balance sheet (monetary policy meas ures) are available as control variables.9 These control variables are not yet included  in the baseline (columns one to three); for  
9 These are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,  Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,  France, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,  Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zea 
land, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Slovakia, Slo venia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Tur key and the United States. For euro area countries, the  monthly growth rate for the respective national central  bank balance sheet is used. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
36
The effect of economic support measures on different asset classes 
Item Outfl ows (ln) Infl ows (ln) Total fl ows (ln) Outfl ows (ln) Infl ows (ln) Total fl ows (ln) Bonds Money market paper 
Income support 
(index, 0-2) 
Debt/contract relief (index, 0-2) 
Fiscal measures 
(US$, ln) 
International support (US$, ln) 
0.197** (0.080) 
0.053 
(0.077) 
0.016 
(0.010) 
0.042* (0.023) 
0.241*** (0.068) 
0.100 
(0.073) 
0.020** (0.007) 
0.027 
(0.019) 
0.266*** (0.087) 
0.136 
(0.089) 
0.022** (0.010) 
0.035* 
(0.020) 
0.438*** (0.154) 
0.450*** (0.146) 
0.049* 
(0.026) 
– 0.242 
(0.161) 
0.324** (0.157) 
0.428** (0.157) 
0.020 
(0.022) 
– 0.214 (0.203) 
0.454*** (0.156) 
0.622*** (0.156) 
0.035 
(0.031) 
– 0.299 
(0.215) 
Equity Investment certifi cates 
Income support 
(index, 0-2) 
Debt/contract relief (index, 0-2) 
Fiscal measures 
(US$, ln) 
International support (US$, ln) 
0.194** (0.078) 
0.175*** (0.062) 
0.005 
(0.011) 
0.034 
(0.029) 
0.202** (0.082) 
0.186** (0.076) 
0.021* 
(0.012) 
– 0.008 (0.029) 
0.208** (0.079) 
0.233*** (0.077) 
0.009 
(0.014) 
0.015 
(0.024) 
0.138 
(0.091) 
0.207*** (0.066) 
– 0.006 
(0.024) 
0.049 
(0.059) 
– 0.038 (0.098) 
– 0.002 (0.069) 
0.002 
(0.024) 
0.035 
(0.041) 
0.087 
(0.106) 
0.157** (0.072) 
– 0.005 (0.025) 
0.034 
(0.064) 
Foreign direct investment Other investment 
Income support 
(index, 0-2) 
Debt/contract relief (index, 0-2) 
Fiscal measures 
(US$, ln) 
International support (US$, ln) 
0.272* (0.134) 
0.170 (0.108) 
0.014 (0.020) 
0.021 
(0.028) 
0.063 
(0.123) 
0.164* (0.093) 
0.030 
(0.022) 
– 0.060 (0.100) 
0.471*** (0.129) 
0.310*** (0.091) 
0.051*** (0.015) 
0.051 
(0.031) 
0.087 
(0.115) 
0.171 
(0.108) 
0.015 
(0.015) 
– 0.059* (0.033) 
0.009 
(0.104) 
– 0.132 (0.120) 
0.009 
(0.025) 
0.028 
(0.058) 
0.133 (0.100) 
0.129 (0.119) 
0.008 (0.023) 
0.022 (0.040) 
*** Signifi cance at the 1% level, ** signifi cance at the 5% level, * signifi cance at the 10% level. Time-specifi c and country specifi c fi xed effects are included but not reported. Robust standard errors (clustered over months and countries) in paren theses.  
Deutsche Bundesbank 
comparison, columns four to six show the  estimation results including the control vari ables. 
Both the government response index and  the containment and health index tend to  have a weak negative infl uence on Ger many’s bilateral capital fl ows. International  investors may possibly perceive them as risk  indicators for the country in question. By  contrast, it appears that economic support  measures tend to increase bilateral capital  fl ows.10 The results of the baseline regres sions and the variation including control  variables are very similar. It therefore seems  that the two control variables did not have  a substantial impact on capital fl ows. The  
control variables are therefore omitted from  the analysis below. This makes it possible to  include all of Germany’s partner countries  that are recorded in the German balance of  payments. 
In a second step, the infl uence of the  adopted measures on the different categor ies of capital fl ows is investigated: bonds,  money market paper, equities, investment  
10 Estimates that do not extend to December 2020  but only include the period up to August 2020 show  economic support measures to have more strongly sig nifi cant effects on cross- border capital fl ows. This sug gests that such measures tend to have a greater im pact when they are fi rst taken and that their effect on  the intensity of capital fl ows weakens over time. 
certifi cates, foreign direct investment, and  other investment. The analysis is limited to  the four economic support measures be cause they are especially suitable for an  economic evaluation. The table on p.  36  illus trates the estimation results. Unlike the  previous results, several measures show  highly signifi cant effects on the individual  asset classes. Above all, cross- border capital  fl ows involving equities, bonds and money  market paper appear to benefi t from for 
eign pandemic response measures – in both  directions. This is not unusual: they are  liquid investments with holders that re spond particularly quickly to new circum stances, which is refl ected in cross- border  capital fl ows. By contrast, investment cer tifi cates, foreign direct investment and  other investment largely do not respond, or  respond only weakly, to the measures.11 
The aim of this study was to investigate  whether pandemic response measures  
abroad caused by the pandemic.18 To wit, Ger man enterprises’ outbound FDI, too, fell dis tinctly in 2020 compared with the previous  
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
37
taken by foreign governments infl uence  
Germany’s bilateral capital fl ows. The re 
sults suggest that most of the measures to  
contain the pandemic or strengthen health  
protection tend to have a slight negative  
impact on Germany’s fi nancial relation 
ships. By contrast, it appears that economic  
support measures, particularly income sup 
port, tend to support capital fl ows. This  
holds true, above all, for equities, bonds  
and money market paper. 
11 As a robustness check, all estimates were also per 
formed excluding the United Kingdom to take account  
of the possible impact of Brexit on Germany’s capital  
fl ows. This did not change the results. 
higher – in some cases short-term – direct in 
vestment flows from and to Germany. 
Not only long term adjust 
ments but also  short-term oper ations could be  
a factor in direct  investment 
year, whereas foreign enterprises’ FDI flows to  Germany were higher than in 2019. Inflows  and outflows were, on balance, nearly neck  and neck in the past year (balance: -€½ billion).  A year earlier, FDI recorded net capital exports  of €76 billion. 
Direct investment is normally geared more to  the long term, which means that adjustments  also tend to be more longer-term in nature.  Nonetheless, shorter-term operations between  affiliated enterprises also impact on FDI flows.  This can be the case, for instance, if an affiliate  in a country renders certain financial services  across national borders for affiliates in other  countries. Some such cross-border relocations  of business activity could be seen in the past  few years in connection with the United King dom’s exit from the EU. This contributed to  
In 2020, German enterprises invested €96½  billion abroad, and thus €39½ billion less than  a year previously. They once again expanded, in  particular, their equity investments in foreign  branches, by €79 billion. Foreign direct invest 
ment via equity capital in the narrower sense  was more than three times higher than that  conducted via reinvested earnings, most of  which, admittedly, is still an estimate. In the  past year, around 46% of equity capital in 
vested abroad originated from firms in the  manufacturing sector and around 44½% from  
18 A special survey of German enterprises operating  abroad on the impact of the pandemic conducted by the  Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Indus try in the summer of 2020 (DIHK (2020)) provides a de tailed picture of this. Given the far-reaching restrictions im posed by the pandemic, 83% of the responding enterprises  expected a decrease in revenue, and 56% of enterprises  were planning to invest less. The impact on firms of the  restrictions vary depending on the sector and where the  enterprises are located abroad. 
German enter prises once  
again expanded  their equity  
investments, in  particular, … 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
38
Financial account 
€ billion 
Item 2018r 2019r 2020r 
Financial account balance1 + 246.5 + 203.8 + 227.6 
1 Direct investment +  20.5 +  76.1 –  0.6 
Domestic investment  
abroad2 + 156.1 + 136.3 +  96.6 
Foreign investment  
in the reporting country2 + 135.6 +  60.2 +  97.2 
2 Portfolio investment + 153.6 +  73.4 +  42.7 
Domestic investment  
in foreign securities2 +  82.6 + 136.9 + 186.5 
Shares3 +  9.3 +  14.1 +  65.9 
Investment fund shares4 +  28.4 +  53.9 +  64.4 
Short-term debt  
 securities5 +  2.0 +  8.6 +  2.0 
Long-term debt  
 securities6 +  43.1 +  60.2 +  54.1 
Foreign investment  
in domestic securities2 –  71.0 +  63.4 + 143.8 
Shares3 –  30.4 –  6.1 –  16.8 
Investment fund shares –  6.4 –  4.9 +  0.9 
Short-term debt  
 securities5 +  5.1 +  15.9 +  80.2 
Long-term debt  
 securities6 –  39.4 +  58.5 +  79.5 
3 Financial derivatives7 +  22.5 +  24.5 +  99.1 
4 Other investment8 +  49.5 +  30.3 +  86.5 
Monetary fi nancial  
 institutions9 +  85.8 +  19.5 – 112.9 
Short-term +  72.9 +  12.1 –  71.3 
Long-term +  12.9 +  7.4 –  41.6 
Enterprises and  
 households10 +  20.2 –  13.3 +  55.5 
Short-term +  13.4 –  5.5 +  22.4 
Long-term +  6.8 –  7.8 +  33.1 
General government –  11.6 –  4.6 +  11.6 
Short-term –  9.9 –  1.3 +  12.7 
Long-term –  1.7 –  3.3 –  1.1 
Bundesbank –  44.8 +  28.6 + 132.2 
5 Reserve assets +  0.4 –  0.5 –  0.1 
1 Increase in net external position: + / decrease in net external  position: –. 2 Increase: +. 3 Including participation certifi cates.  4 Including reinvestment of earnings. 5 Short- term: original ma 
turity of up to one year. 6 Long- term: original maturity of more  than one year or unlimited. 7  Balance of transactions arising  from options and fi nancial futures contracts as well as employee  stock options. 8 Includes in particular loans and trade credits as  well as currency and deposits. 9  Excluding the Bundesbank.  10  Includes the following sectors: fi nancial corporations (ex 
cluding monetary fi nancial institutions) as well as non- fi nancial  corporations, households and non- profi t institutions serving  households. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
firms which provide financial and insurance ser vices.19 In terms of volume, cross-border acqui sitions by firms domiciled in Germany played a  significantly greater role last year than in  2019.20 
By way of intra-group lending, enterprises in  Germany provided €17½ billion worth of fund ing to affiliated enterprises abroad in 2020,  only slightly less than a year earlier. Financial  loans accounted for the vast majority of such  lending. They were divided roughly equally be tween affiliated enterprises abroad and Ger man subsidiaries of foreign parent enterprises.  Loans from subsidiaries to their parents are  referred to as reverse investments. This expres sion illustrates the fact that the loans are  granted across borders in the opposite direc tion to the actual direct investment relation ship. On the other hand, redemptions predom inated significantly among loans previously  granted by parents domiciled in Germany to  their foreign subsidiaries. 
In the past year, too, German enterprises in vested in many countries and regions. Just over  two-thirds of FDI flows were directed, on bal ance, to other European countries, with €49  billion alone invested in other euro area coun tries. Particularly large amounts were invested  in the Netherlands and Luxembourg, two coun tries where holding companies often set up  shop. Moreover, within Europe, affiliates in the  United Kingdom and Sweden were provided  with comparatively large amounts. The United  States was the main non-European destination  of extensive direct investment (€28½ billion). 
19 The shares relate only to decipherable net transfers used  to augment equity capital. 
20 According to the Thomson Reuters database (REFINITIV),  roughly €57 billion was used to finance takeovers of com panies domiciled abroad and previously under foreign  ownership – where the German stake after the transaction  is at least 10%. That was significantly more than 2019, for  which a takeover value of €33½ billion was reported. The  time at which mergers and acquisitions are captured in the  balance of payments can, however, differ from that re 
corded by Thomson Reuters, meaning that the reported  figures are not directly comparable. 
… but also  
provided credit  to affiliated  
enterprises 
Europe and USA  key destinations  of German  
direct invest 
ment 
Capital inflows  primarily in the  form of intra group lending 
Foreign firms increasingly provided direct in vestment funds to domestic enterprises last  year. They channelled net inflows of €97 billion  to them, up by €37 billion from the previous  year. Foreign parent enterprises provided €66  billion of these funds through intra-group  
Direct investment 
€ billion 
German direct investment abroad 
Direct investment loans 
Equity capital 
Foreign direct investment in Germany 
Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report 
March 2021 
39
+ 
160 
loans, chiefly in the form of financial loans.  + 
140 
Reverse investments, whereby foreign subsid + 
120 
iaries grant loans to their German parent com + 
100 
panies, were a major factor here as well. These  + 
80 
reverse flows are often the result of capital  + 
60 
market transactions involving German enter + 
40 
prises’ financing subsidiaries in which securities  + 
20 
are issued abroad and the proceeds are passed  
0 
on to their parent companies in Germany.  – 
20 
Moreover, foreign owners also boosted the  equity capital they provided to German  
Direct investment loans 
Equity capital 


	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 
Large inflows to  Germany from  some countries 
branches by €31 billion. 
The regional structure of FDI in Germany shows  that firms from many countries around the  globe make entrepreneurial investments in Ger 
By region (2020) All countries 
Euro area 
Other 
EU countries 
German direct 
many. In the past year, a particularly large share  
investment abroad Other 
of direct investment funding originated from  
European  countries 
Foreign direct investment 
Net capital  
exports in other  investment 
Considerable  increase in the  Bundesbank’s  assets 
US firms (€30½ billion). In addition, relatively  large amounts of FDI flowed to Germany from  Luxembourg, the United Kingdom and Swe den. 
Other investment 
Other investment, comprising financial and  trade credits (where these do not constitute a  part of direct investment) as well as bank de posits and other assets, resulted in net capital  exports of €86½ billion in 2020, up from €30½  billion in 2019. 
This was mainly because net assets via the Bun desbank’s accounts increased by €132 billion.  Gross assets were even up by €243 billion after  having fallen a year earlier. These mainly reflect  changes in the Bundesbank’s TARGET2 claims  on the ECB. The renewed sharp rise was trig gered by the increased APP and PEPP asset pur chases. A close relationship between the evolu tion of the Bundesbank’s TARGET2 claims and  
North America in Germany 
Central and 
South America 
Asia 
Africa and 
Oceania 
– 20 0 + 20 + 40 + 60 + 80 + 100 Deutsche Bundesbank 
asset purchases by Eurosystem central banks  had already been visible in previous years.21 The  Bundesbank’s TARGET2 claims on the ECB in creased by €241 billion net last year. 
The Bundesbank’s liabilities to non-residents  likewise rose considerably in 2020, by €111 bil lion. The Bundesbank’s liabilities arising from  the allocation of euro banknotes within the  Eurosystem sector increased by €37½ billion  last year. As in previous years, though, (end-of period) transactions by foreign counterparties  
21 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c, 2019, 2017a, 2017b,  2016). 
Bundesbank’s  liabilities up  considerably as  well 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
40
Other investment*  
broken down by sector 
Balances in € billion 
posits by foreign institutions, especially from  group-affiliated banks. Deposits of non-resident  enterprises and individuals at German MFIs  
+ + + + + 
– – – 
150 120 90 
60 
30 
0 
30 
60 
90 
2019 2020 
rose, too, albeit to a lesser extent. In lending  business, domestic credit institutions likewise  recorded capital imports. Although they  granted more financial loans to non-resident  enterprises and individuals, this was not  enough to offset the decline in their deposits at  foreign banks. 
– 
120 
Enterprises and 
households 
General 
government 
Monetary Bundesbank financial 
institutions 1 
In other investment, transactions by non-banks  led to outflows of funds abroad (€67 billion). It  was particularly net capital exports by enter 
Non-banks’  
transactions led  to net capital  
* Includes in particular loans and trade credits as well as cur rency and deposits; net capital exports: +. 1 Excluding the  Bundesbank. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
TARGET2 and other investment  excluding TARGET2* 
€ billion 
exports 
prises and individuals (€55½ billion) which  made themselves felt here. These parties, in  particular, augmented their deposits held at  foreign commercial banks considerably. This  reflected, in some cases – as was the case for  
+ + + + + 
– – – 
250 200 150 100 50 
0 
50 
100 150 
Other investment excluding TARGET2 
2019 2020 
Change in 
TARGET2 balance 2019 2020 
+ 250 + 200 + 150 + 100 + 50 0 
– 50 – 100 – 150 
financial derivatives  – counterpart entries of  transactions with structured securities issued in  Germany. Operations by general government,  too, led on balance to net capital exports  (€11½ billion). These operations primarily in 
cluded repayments of loans taken out across  borders. 
Reserve assets 
Other MFIs  
record net  
inflows of funds 
* Net capital exports: +. 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
were responsible for the lion’s share of the  increase in external liabilities: at the end of a  given year, the deposits of non-euro area resi dents at the Bundesbank often temporarily  record a significant increase, and 2020 was no  different. 
In other investment transactions, a quite signifi cant net inflow of funds amounting to €113 bil lion was recorded in 2020 via the accounts of  the other monetary financial institutions (MFIs).  This was attributable primarily to higher de 
In 2020, there were virtually no transaction related changes to the Bundesbank’s reserve  assets. 
However, the international reserve holdings are  also influenced by balance sheet adjustments  which, in compliance with internationally  agreed accounting standards, are not recog 
nised in the balance of payments. The end-of year revaluation of the reserve assets resulted  in an increase of nearly €20 billion in 2020, due  particularly to the rise in gold prices. As at the  reporting reference date of 31 December 2020,  the value of Germany’s reserve assets stood at  €219 billion. 
Reserve assets:  nearly no  
changes through  transactions 
Market price  effects push up  book value 
List of references 
Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report 
March 2021 
41
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Public finances in 2020: automatic stabilisers and temporary  measures strongly supported the economy, Monthly Report, February 2021, pp. 70-72. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Households’ saving behaviour during the pandemic, Monthly  Report, December 2020, pp. 26-27. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), China’s foreign trade withstanding the global economic crisis,  Monthly Report, August 2020, pp. 15-16. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), What drives Germany’s TARGET balances? A BVAR analysis for  distinguishing global and European causes, Monthly Report, March 2020, pp. 30-33. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Germany’s TARGET2 claims in 2018, Annual Report 2018, pp. 16-17. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017a), The increase in Germany’s TARGET2 claims, Monthly Report, March  2017, pp. 30-31. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017b), TARGET2 balances – mirroring developments in financial markets,  Monthly Report, December 2017, pp. 75-76. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), The impact of Eurosystem securities purchases on the TARGET2  balances, Monthly Report, March 2016, pp. 53-55. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2008), Certificates and warrants in the balance of payments, Monthly  Report, March 2008, pp. 26-27. 
DIHK (2020), AHK World Business Outlook, Special survey on the COVID-19 impact, July 2020. 
European Commission (2021), Country Report Germany 2021 including an in-depth review on the  prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances, Brussels. 
European Commission, International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development, United Nations, World Bank (2009), System of National Accounts 2008 (SNA 2008). 
Goldbach, S. and V. Nitsch (2021), Covid-19 and Capital Flows: The Responses of Investors to the  Responses of Governments, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, forthcoming. 
Guideline (EU) 2018/1151 of the European Central Bank of 2 August 2018 amending Guideline  ECB/2011/23 on the statistical reporting requirements of the European Central Bank in the field of  external statistics (ECB/2018/19) and amending guidelines, most recently Guideline (EU) 2018/1151. 
International Monetary Fund (2021), World Economic Outlook Update, January 2021. 
International Monetary Fund (2009), Balance of Payments and International Investment Position  Manual, Sixth Edition (BPM6). 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Monthly Report 
March 2021 
42
Lane, P. R. (2020), The Macroeconomic Impact of the Pandemic and the Policy Response, ECB blog  post, 4 August 2020. 
Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 January 2005  on Community statistics concerning balance of payments, international trade in services and  foreign direct investment and amending regulations, most recently Regulation (EU) 2016/1013 of  8 June 2016. 
UNCTAD (2021), Investment Trends Monitor, No 38, January 2021. 
World Trade Organization (2020), Trade Shows Signs of Rebound from COVID-19, Recovery Still  Uncertain, WTO press release, 6 October 2020.